Pierre, as it happens for the most part, felt the full weight of the physical hardships and stresses experienced in captivity only when these stresses and hardships were over. After his release from captivity, he came to Orel, and on the third day of his arrival, while he was going to Kiev, he fell ill and lay ill in Orel for three months; he became, as the doctors said, bilious fever. Despite the fact that doctors treated him, bled him and gave him medicine to drink, he still recovered. Everything that happened to Pierre from the time of his release until his illness left almost no impression on him. He remembered only the gray, gloomy, sometimes rainy, sometimes snowy weather, inner physical anguish, pain in his legs, in his side; he remembered the general impression of misfortunes, suffering of people; he remembered the curiosity of officers, generals who questioned him, his worries about finding a carriage and horses, and most importantly, he remembered his inability to think and feel at the time. On the day of his release, he saw the corpse of Petya Rostov. On the same day, he learned that Prince Andrew had been alive for more than a month after the Battle of Borodino and had only recently died in Yaroslavl, in the Rostov house. And on the same day, Denisov, who reported this news to Pierre, mentioned Helene's death between conversations, assuming that Pierre had known this for a long time. All this seemed strange to Pierre at the time. He felt that he could not understand the significance of all this news. At that time, he was in a hurry only to leave these places as soon as possible, where people were killing each other, to some quiet shelter and there to come to his senses, rest and think about all the strange and new things that he had learned during this time. But as soon as he arrived in Orel, he fell ill. Waking up from his illness, Pierre saw around him his two people who had come from Moscow — Terenty and Vaska, and the eldest princess, who, living in Yelets, on Pierre's estate, and having learned about his release and illness, came to him to look after him. During his recovery, Pierre only gradually weaned himself from the impressions of the past months that had become familiar to him and got used to the fact that no one would drive him anywhere tomorrow, that no one would take away his warm bed and that he would probably have lunch, tea, and dinner. But in his dream he saw himself for a long time in the same conditions of captivity. Pierre also gradually understood the news that he had learned after his release from captivity: the death of Prince Andrew, the death of his wife, the destruction of the French. A joyful feeling of freedom — that complete, integral, inherent freedom, the consciousness of which he experienced for the first time at the first halt, when leaving Moscow, filled Pierre's soul during his recovery. He was surprised that this inner freedom, independent of external circumstances, was now, as if with excess, luxuriously furnished with external freedom. He was alone in a strange city, without acquaintances. No one demanded anything from him; he was not sent anywhere. He had everything he wanted; the thought of his wife, which had always tormented him before, was no longer there, since she was no longer there. — Oh, how good! How glorious! — he would say to himself when a cleanly laid table with fragrant broth was brought to him, or when he lay down on a soft, clean bed at night, or when he remembered that his wife and the French were no more. —Oh, how good, how glorious! — And out of old habit, he asked himself the question: well, and then what? What am I going to do? And immediately he answered himself: nothing. I will live. Oh, how nice! The very thing that he had been tormented by before, what he was constantly looking for, the purpose of life, now did not exist for him. It was not by chance that this sought-after goal of life no longer existed for him only at the present moment, but he felt that it did not exist and could not exist. And it was this lack of purpose that gave him that full, joyful consciousness of freedom, which at that time constituted his happiness. He could not have a goal, because he now had faith—not faith in any rules, or words, or thoughts, but faith in a living, always felt God. Before, he was looking for it in the goals that he set for himself. This search for a goal was only a search for God; and suddenly he learned in his captivity, not by words, not by reasoning, but by direct feeling, what his nanny had told him for a long time: that God is here, here, everywhere. He learned in captivity that God in Karataev is greater, infinite and incomprehensible than in the Architect of the universe recognized by Masons. He had the feeling of a man who had found what he was looking for under his feet, while he strained his eyes, looking far away from himself. He spent his whole life looking somewhere, over the heads of the people around him, and it was necessary not to strain his eyes, but only to look in front of him. He had not been able to see before the great, the incomprehensible and the infinite in anything. He only felt that it must be somewhere, and was looking for it. In everything close, understandable, he saw one limited, petty, everyday, meaningless. He armed himself with a mental telescope and looked into the distance, to where this petty, everyday, hiding in the fog of distance, seemed to him great and infinite only because it was vaguely visible. This was how he imagined European life, politics, Freemasonry, philosophy, philanthropy. But even then, in those moments that he considered his weakness, his mind penetrated into this distance, and there he saw the same petty, everyday, meaningless. Now he has learned to see the great, eternal and infinite in everything, and therefore naturally, in order to see it, in order to enjoy its contemplation, he threw the pipe through which he had been looking over people's heads until now, and joyfully contemplated around him the ever-changing, ever-great, incomprehensible and endless life. And the closer he looked, the more calm and happy he was. The terrible question that had previously destroyed all his mental constructions was: why? no longer existed for him. Now to this question — why? a simple answer was always ready in his soul: because there is a God, that God, without whose will no hair will fall from a person's head.